 p class="c-dek" itemprop="description" A rhino-head heist spree is sweeping the world and destroying rhino populations, mostly because of some ridiculous myths  p 
 p It was in most respects a typical  a href="http:  www.bloomberg.com news 2013-04-18 rhino-horn-heist-robs-dublin-museum-of-650-000-rarities.html" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'1',r'None'" heist that happened in Dublin last month  a .
 Masked men, roughed-up security guards, $650,000 in stolen booty. But 
this wasn't art or jewelry that was stolen. The contraband, instead, 
was four rhinoceros heads. Or, more specifically, their horns.  p 
 p 



    

    
    
        
        
          p 
 p And this wasn't the first time. A  a href="http:  www.guardian.co.uk environment 2011 aug 08 rhino-horn-thefts-chinese-medicine" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'5',r'None'" rhino-head heist spree  a  swept Europe in 2011, as thieves raided museums and auctions houses in seven countries, prompting  a href="http:  www.independent.ie irish-news europol-probe-into-crime-gang-linked-to-500k-rhino-horn-heist-29211791.html" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'6',r'None'" 30 investigations by Europol  a , 20 of which are ongoing. Similar heists have also been  a href="http:  www.nydailynews.com news world mozambique-rhinos-extinct-experts-article-1.1333267" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'7',r'None'" on the rise in Africa  a , as well as in the odd  a href="http:  www.walb.com story 11322030 thieves-heist-rare-trophy?clienttype=printable" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'8',r'None'" American backwater town  a . Meanwhile, an  a href="http:  www.businessweek.com articles 2012-03-22 london-capital-of-the-rhino-horn-business" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'9',r'None'" online business  a  thrives as well--including one dealer on  a href="http:  motherboard.vice.com blog rhino-horn-crisis-and-the-darknet" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'10',r'None'" Facebook who only accepts bitcoin  a .  p 
 p What is driving this " a href="http:  www.bbc.co.uk news science-environment-22075274" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'11',r'None'" highly organized  a " crime ring?  p 
 p If
 you guessed "China," you were wrong. The answer is Vietnam. The 
country's appetite for rhino horn is so great that it now fetches  a href="http:  www.thanhniennews.com index pages 20120427-vietnam-driving-increase-in-rhino-poaching-experts.aspx" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'12',r'None'" up to $100,000 kg  a , making it worth more than its weight in gold. (Horns  a href="http:  www.reuters.com article 2012 04 26 ozatp-africa-money-idAFJOE83P03N20120426" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'13',r'None'" average around 1-3 kg each  a , depending on the species.)  p 
 p  b Behind the Mysterious Craze for Rhino Horn  b  br The
 weird thing is that the surge in Vietnamese demand is fairly recent. 
Though rhino horn elixirs for fevers and liver problems were first 
prescribed in traditional Chinese medicine more than 1,800 years ago, by
 the early 1990s demand was limited. Trade bans among Asian countries 
instituted in the 1980s and early 1990s proved largely effective in 
quashing supply, with some help from poaching crackdowns in countries 
where rhinos live. Meanwhile, the removal of rhino horn powder from 
traditional Chinese pharmacopeia in the 1990s had largely doused 
demand. In the early 1990s, for instance, horns  a href="http:  www.traffic.org species-reports traffic_species_mammals66.pdf" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'14',r'None'" sold for only $250-500 kg  a  (pdf, p.85). And only around 15 rhinos were poached in South Africa each year from 1990 to 2007.  p 
 p But things started changing in 2008. That year, 83 were killed, followed by 122 the next year. By 2012,  a href="http:  asiancorrespondent.com 107462 rhino-crisis-if-theyre-gone-theyre-gone-forever " data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'15',r'None'" that number had hit 688  a . Here's a look at how many rhinos were killed, on average, each day:  p 
 p  b Rhino Horn: Cancer-Zapper  b  br What
 happened in 2008 to prompt a resurgence in demand? The closest guess is
 a rumor that swept Vietnam in the mid-2000s that imbibing rhino 
horn powder had  a href="http:  www.guardian.co.uk environment 2011 nov 25 cure-cancer-rhino-horn-vietnam" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'16',r'None'" cured a Vietnamese politician's cancer  a . That
 rumor persists to this day. And note that this has nothing to do with 
traditional Chinese medicine. As Huijun Shen, the president of the UK 
Association of Traditional Chinese Medicine explained to Nature 
magazine, there's no record of using rhino horn to treat cancer in 
nearly  a href="http:  issuu.com argos docs the-asian-medicine?mode=window&amp;pageNumber=search" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'17',r'None'" two millennia worth of Chinese medical texts  a  (p.23).  p 
 p In Vietnam, however, at least some respected doctors  a href="http:  ngm.nationalgeographic.com 2012 03 rhino-wars gwin-text 2" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'18',r'None'" vouch for rhino horn's cancer-curing properties  a . One woman who purchased $2,000 worth of horn powder  a href="http:  www.time.com time printout 0,8816,2075283,00.html" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'19',r'None'" on her doctors' advice  a .  p 
 p So
 why are Vietnamese willing to shell out thousands for 
the pharmacological equivalent of chewing your fingernails? The short 
answer: wealth. Vietnam's tally of  a href="http:  www.guardian.co.uk world 2013 mar 24 war-babies-billionaires-vietnam-women" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'20',r'None'" multimillionaires has grown 150% in the last five years  a . The Convention on the International Trade on Endangered Species notes that this rising wealth is " a href="http:  www.cites.org eng com sc 62 E62-47-02-A.pdf" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'21',r'None'" inflating a bubble of demand for rhino horn  a " (pdf, p.3). This chart of retail sales hints at how rapidly Vietnamese consumer spending has picked up in just a few years:  p 
 p But
 as in many fast-developing countries, the quality and availability of 
cancer care in Vietnam hasn't kept pace with the country's economic 
growth. "Cancer is a big problem in Vietnam. We have about 150,000 new 
cases a year, and the waiting list for radiotherapy is very 
long," Vietnamese oncologist Dr. Dang Huy Quoc Thinh told the  a href="http:  www.iaea.org Publications Magazines Bulletin Bull521 52105811011.pdf" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'22',r'None'" International Association for Atomic Energy Bulletin  a  (pdf, p.2). "People die because we can't provide the treatment in time." As of 2010 Vietnam had  a href="http:  www.iaea.org Publications Magazines Bulletin Bull521 52105811011.pdf" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'23',r'None'" only 25 radiotherapy machines for a population of 87 million  a  (pdf).
 Here's a look at how that ratio--about 3.48 million people per 
machine--compares with those of neighboring countries, via the IAEA's  a href="http:  cancer.iaea.org documents AGaRTBrochure.pdf" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'24',r'None'" Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy  a  (pdf, p.3):  p 
 p Plus, rates of cancer are also  a href="http:  english.vietnamnet.vn fms society 56271 cancer-patients-increase-quickly-in-vietnam.html" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'25',r'None'" rising 20-30% a year  a ,
 both because prosperity has brought increased pollution and unhealthier
 lifestyles, and simply because more cases are being caught and 
diagnosed. However, many people still aren't very familiar with cancer, 
so that 70-80% of patients at Vietnam's four cancer hospitals are  a href="http:  www.mcclatchydc.com 2012 07 25 157674 cancer-survivors-journey-leads.html#.UY5mtSvSNc8" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'26',r'None'" diagnosed only in late stages  a . That gives Vietnam a cancer mortality rate of 73%,  a href="http:  vietmaz.com 2013 04 vns-cancer-death-rate-among-worlds-highest #.UY5qHyvSNc8" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'27',r'None'" one of the highest in the world  a , according to the deputy director of a hospital in Hanoi; the average for the developing world is 67.8%, he said.  p 
 p  b Rhino Horn: Party Drug  b  br Some conservation groups, however, don't think rhino horn's newfound popularity in Vietnam has  a href="http:  envietnam.org library Newsletter ENV_Newsletter_Issue_2_May_2012.pdf" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'28',r'None'" much to do with the cancer cure-all rumor  a  (pdf, p.2). The more likely reason, they say, is that the horn powder is increasingly seen as a cocaine-like party drug,  a href="http:  www.groundreport.com World Recognition-Awards-May-2012-The-Saigon-Horn-Part-1 2946463" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'29',r'None'" virility enhancer  a  and luxury item--" a href="http:  www.globalpost.com dispatch news regions africa south-africa 120823 rhino-horn-party-drug-vietnam-south-africa-poaching" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'30',r'None'" the alcoholic drink of millionaires  a ," as a Vietnamese news site called it.  p 
 p That's partly because it is supposed to help the liver. With  a href="http:  researchbank.rmit.edu.au view rmit:11258" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'31',r'None'" alcohol consumption on the rise  a  as
 living standards improve, the swinging Vietnamese now prize rhino horn 
as a way to let them drink more and cure hangovers faster. Tom Milliken,
 an expert on the rhino horn market, reckons that a rhino-horn 
detox, "especially following excessive intake of alcohol, is probably 
the  a href="http:  www.cites.org eng com sc 62 E62-47-02-A.pdf" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'32',r'None'" most common routine usage promoted in the marketplace  a " (pdf, p.29). (The idea that it's an aphrodisiac, however,  a href="http:  www.savetherhino.org rhino_info threats_to_rhino poaching_for_traditional_chinese_medicine" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'33',r'None'" has no basis in traditional Chinese medicine  a .)  p 
 p  b Rhino Horn: Status Symbol  b  br In fact, rhino horn is now more expensive than cocaine, which has helped  a href="http:  news.yahoo.com vietnam-craves-rhino-horn-costs-more-cocaine-062134928.html" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'34',r'None'" build its cachet  a . It's also  a href="http:  www.eawildlife.org swaraonline swaras swaraIssues swara_2011_04.pdf" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'35',r'None'" ideal for greasing palms for business deals  a  (pdf,
 p.36). That could be partly because newly affluent Vietnamese don't 
have that much to spend their money on. The government has  a href="http:  english.vietnamnet.vn fms business 54572 only-10-enterprises-sell-genuine-branded-goods-in-vietnam.html" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'36',r'None'" issued just 10 licenses for distributors of luxury goods  a . And its small size means Vietnam is still  a href="http:  english.vietnamnet.vn fms business 55397 how-do-big-the-vietnamese-branded-goods-market---part-1-.html" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'37',r'None'" off the radar for many luxury brands  a .  p 
 p Rhino horn is also popular among some public officials. "I can  a href="http:  phys.org news 2012-05-vietnam-cancer-cure-horn-habit-threat.html" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'38',r'None'" drink a lot of alcohol but I am still sober and strong  a .
 I don't have a headache and I do not feel tired," Tran Huy Tu, a senior
 policeman, told AFP, apparently fearless of any consequences. "It's not
 legal to buy this stuff, but in Vietnam you can buy anything with 
money."  p 
 p Officials have been entwined in the business for a while. The Vietnamese embassy in South Africa has been " a href="http:  www.traffic.org species-reports traffic_species_mammals66.pdf" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'39',r'None'" repeatedly implicated in illicit rhino horn trade  a "
 (pdf, p.82) according to a report by conservation group Traffic. It's 
not like all of the Vietnamese government has turned a blind eye; its  a href="http:  tuoitrenews.vn society 9377 hanoi-police-seize-21-kg-of-suspected-rhino-horns" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'40',r'None'" customs officials sometimes confiscate rhino horn  a , and the government just  a href="http:  www.news24.com Green News 668-rhino-poached-in-2012-20130110" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'41',r'None'" signed an agreement with South Africa  a  to step up enforcement.  p 
 p  b The Paradox of a Rhinoless World  b  br The Vietnamese rhino horn craze has caused  a href="http:  www.bloomberg.com news 2011-12-06 rhino-poaching-in-south-africa-climbs-to-record-on-asian-demand.html" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'42',r'None'" an unprecedented surge in rhino poaching  a   a href="http:  allafrica.com stories 201305090659.html" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'43',r'None'" throughout Africa  a  and  a href="http:  articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com 2013-02-05 guwahati 36763399_1_kaziranga-national-park-rhino-horns-unabated-rhino" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'44',r'None'" Asia  a . The  a href="http:  www.nydailynews.com news world mozambique-rhinos-extinct-experts-article-1.1333267" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'45',r'None'" last rhino of Mozambique was confirmed dead  a  in early May. Oftentimes,  a href="http:  www.thenewage.co.za 92941-1007-53-SAs_mounting_rhino_war" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'46',r'None'" poachers saw off the rhinos' horns while they're still alive  a , leaving them to bleed to death:  p 
 p The
 slaughter is such that poaching is becoming less frequent in some 
areas, simply because there are so few rhinos left to kill. Have a look 
at how Zimbabwe's poaching has trended:  p 
 p Paradoxically,
 the world's dwindling rhino population threatens only to make this 
worse, as diminished supply makes prices climb even higher. Given that 
one of the things driving demand is the perceived luxury of the item, 
higher prices alone are unlikely to snuff out demand. And with a single 
horn fetching as much as $300,000, the risk of being caught probably 
seems to many poachers to be one worth running.  p 
 p That's probably why the fight against poaching is something of a losing battle. Though South Africa has done an  a href="http:  wwf.panda.org what_we_do endangered_species rhinoceros african_rhinos white_rhinoceros " data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'47',r'None'" admirable job of protecting its white rhinos  a , 668 were poached there in 2012-- a href="http:  www.care2.com causes rangers-help-poachers-murder-the-last-15-rhinos-in-mozambique.html" data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'48',r'None'" a 50% increase on 2011  a . And as we discussed recently,  a href="http:  qz.com 67014 not-just-for-the-taliban-anymore-drones-are-now-tracking-rhino-poachers " data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'49',r'None'" other countries may soon use drones to foil poachers  a , so dire is the problem.  p 
 p Vietnam's
 own nature park rangers don't have to worry, though. Their job is 
already done. In 2010, the last Javan rhino in Vietnam was found dead, a
 bullet wound in his leg and with  a href="http:  wwf.panda.org what_we_do endangered_species rhinoceros asian_rhinos javan_rhinoceros " data-omni-click="r'article',r'',d,r'intext',r'50',r'None'" his horn hacked off  a .  p 
 p class="c-letters-cta__text" We want to hear what you think about this article.  a href="https:  www.theatlantic.com contact letters " class="c-letters-cta__link" Submit a letter  a  to the editor or write to letters@theatlantic.com.  p 
 p class="c-footer__copyright" TheAtlantic.com Copyright (c) 2019 by The Atlantic Monthly Group. All Rights Reserved.  p 
 p class="c-footer__logo"  a class="c-logo" href=" "  span class="u-element-invisible c-logo__name" The Atlantic  span   svg class="o-icon" viewbox="0 0 256 84"  use xlink:href="#icon-logo-atl"   use   svg   a   p 
